---
title: Websites, CMS and LMS
---

# What makes a website

Websites are built using three components:

1. Content hosting
2. A domain name
3. Website content (in HTML and other languages)

## Content hosting

When you open a link to a website like <https://www.sanbi.ac.za> your browser (a "web client") connects to a remote computer (a server). The first challenge in building a website is finding a system that can service both your needs, as a content producer and the needs of your users who want to be able to reliably load your content without any technical hitches.

From a creator's perspective, a content hosting platform needs to make it easy (or at least possible) to:

* Log in and control access to the "upload" part of the platform

* Add and change pages along with content like images and perhaps audio and video

* Collaborate with others on content

Broadly speaking, there are two approaches to meeting these goals:

1. Content Management Systems (CMSs, such as WordPress, Drupal, Joomla and commercial services such as Wix) typically offer:

    1. Web-based user interfaces with authentication, content creation and sometimes collaboration tools.

    2. A range of templates that control how pages are displayed

    3. Plugins that add features such as new authoring tools or support for displaying different types of media

2. Static site generators generate web pages (including HTML, images and style files) by combining a template with pages written in a markup language.
    1. Markdown is a commonly used markup language that allows plain text to be converted into well-formatted text with headings, embedded images, etc.

Neither CMSs nor static site generators solve the problem of hosting and serving content to users. Both of these are combined with a hosting service that provides these features. Some Content Management Systems are open-source projects that can be self-hosted. There are also commercial CMS hosting providers, some of which offer a "free tier" of services for simple websites.

The content generated by static site generators can be self-hosted, hosted on a commercial web hosting platform or hosted using a service such as Github Pages or Netlify. Typically the content of a static site is hosted by a developer platform such as Github or Gitlab and then served by Github Pages, Netlify or similar services.

From the user's perspective, the platform must

1. be reliably accessible 

2. present content appropriately: e.g. good typography for text, playback controls for audio and video, etc.

3. be easy to find and navigate.

The first of these requirements is a challenge for self-hosted sites, especially in the era of load shedding.

## Domain names and the DNS system

For a website to be findable it needs a name assigned by the Domain Name System. DNS is a globally distributed database used to look up names on the Internet and translate them into Internet addresses. The database is comprised of zones, which delineate the boundaries of control for parts of the database, and records that store information.

An example of a zone is "com", controlled by authorities in the USA, or "sanbi.ac.za", which is controlled by SANBI. The "sanbi.ac.za" zone depends on the "ac.za" zone (controlled by the TENET research and education network) and ultimately the "za" zone (controlled by the South Africa Internet authorities).

For the purposes of websites, the most important record types are "A" records that translate from a name to a numeric IP address and "CNAME" records, which provide aliases for other names.

Some hosting services provide their own DNS names. For example, WordPress sites hosted on "wordpress.com" can have names such as "sanbi.wordpress.com" and "sanbi.github.io" would be a name allocated by Github Pages. Often organisations want to use their own names, for example "metagenomics-training.sanbi.ac.za". In this case they need to control their own DNS zone (which SANBI does) and create DNS records to redirect the name of choice ("metagenomics-training.sanbi.ac.za") to the hosting provide that they are using for a particular website. The hosting service also needs to know about this alias. This is something that is configurable on all hosting services.

## Website content

Most of the discussion on website content will be discussed later, but for now some key points are:

1. All web pages are written in a combination of HTML and supporting languages such as Javascript and the CSS styling language.

2. Hand-editing HTML is not an easy task. Thus website page content is typically written in another language, either using the editor provided by a content management system or, in the case of static site generators, a markup language like Markdown.

3. Smaller media (such as typical PDFs or images) can be hosted alongside website content, but larger and more complex media such as videos is typically hosted elsewhere, for example on Vimeo or YouTube, and then embedded in the pages of the website.

